---
layout: post
title: "clitest: command line tester"
categories: tools
tags:
  - shell
  - command-line
---

It’s like Python’s [doctest](https://docs.python.org/3/library/doctest.html)
but for CLIs. Given a text file containing snippets of shell sessions (prompts
with commands and their expected outputs), clitest executes the snippets and
verifies the actual output matches the described output. It is written in shell
language.  The project lives on
[GitHub](https://github.com/aureliojargas/clitest) and is available under MIT
license. It does not see much development anymore, but that is fairly
understandable given its simplicity. Nevertheless, the author continues to
maintain deliverables and documentation. The project has comprehensive
documentation in its
[README](https://github.com/aureliojargas/clitest/blob/master/README.md).

## Installation and usage

Installation and usage are trivial: the whole clitest is just a single shell
script with no external dependencies. Hence, it is easy to include copies of
clitest in repositories. I was curious how is the little tool implemented in
shell, and I discovered the code is nice and readable. I could not resist
trying to run [ShellCheck](https://www.shellcheck.net/) on it, and it only spat
out few style issues: good job!

I tried to use clitest as a testing driver for
[pyff](https://github.com/petr-muller/pyff) project examples so that I only
need to provide expected output for each example. It worked nice, although the
way how clitest executes the commands to test makes it a little sensitive
about `$CWD`, `$PATH` and the like. Fortunately, these are quite
straightforward to sort out. The test files for pyff are standard Python
source code files, so I needed to embed the clitest instructions into Python
comments (lines starting with the `#` character). I used  the `--prefix` option
for this; it tunes the way how clitest searches for testable snippets in
files.

I have encountered a minor pitfall where pyff does not have entirely
deterministic output. The output is correct, but the ordering of some elements
may be different between runs. clitest fully matches the output against the expected
one, so it is harder to use clitest in these cases (I have decided to make
pyff deterministic, even if the order does not matter). There is a clitest
feature which can alter the matching when using the [inline output
syntax](https://github.com/aureliojargas/clitest/blob/master/README.md#alternative-syntax-inline-output),
but my use case did not match the inline output feature well.

## When would I use it?

I like clitest because it is a single file drop-in without dependencies. This
makes it easy to drop it into a repository where it can serve as a lightweight
integration test driver: all you need are some input files, define how to
execute the program under test and specify expected output.

A second nifty use case is mentioned in the clitest documentation: it can be
nicely used to test the code snippets in your documentation for correctness.
Often, you will write the documentation in markdown or something similar, and
it will contain snippets of how to execute the program and what is the expected
output. This way, you can feed your documentation straight into clitest which
can, without further work, validate your examples are still correct. You
may even do this within a CI automatically, so your documentation is always
up-to-date.
